Every human being has certain inalienable rights that should be protected at any cost. It is the responsibility of a government to ensure the protections of these rights. Among these; the right to self-ownership is paramount to the functioning of society. This includes the right to one's body, the right to one's mind, and the right to free expression. Any oppressive system that violates any of these rights becomes wholesale unethical. Hurt Vonnegut’s “Harrison Bergeron” illustrates the concept of a society whose value for equality has overextended to infringe on the natural rights of individuals. The short story serves to warn its readers that, in excess, the value of equality -- an idea centered around the removal of oppressive systems -- can become oppressive in of itself.
Among the most disturbing facets of “Harrison Bergeron”, is Vonnegut’s intentional suppression of emotional aspects. At the beginning of the short story, we are introduced to a couple, whose old age and marital status are implied. And while Vonnegut provides multiple lines about the weather and other ineffectual aspects, he intentionally relegates the couples loss of a child to only 2 lines. Specifically, their son, Harrison Begeron, is taken at the young age of fourteen. However, the author continues on, explaining: “It was tragic, all right, but Goerge and Hazel couldn’t think about it that hard.” (Vonnegut 370) At the hands of the government, George and Hazel Begeron had lost their ability to recall even the most of vivid and emotional memories; the forceful kidnapping of their only child. Vonnegut uses this piece of his writing effectively, evoking a response of uncomfort for the reader. With this uncomfort, he is able to leverage the emotion aspect of his readers; forcing them to reject a wholly ‘equal’ society on emotional grounds. Additionally, These circumstances indicate a system where individuals are deprived of their basic human rights to their own mind. Without question, the government's use of handicapping agents for physiological use violates the most fundamental of moral principles. Vonnegut provides us with the moral means to reject the notion of a wholly equal society.
Vonnegut’s use of verbiage attempts to create a conflict between the collective and individual. In his short story, Vonnegut paints individualism as beautiful, and equality as nothing but lackluster. The most common phrase in “Harrison Bergeron” is “No better than anybody else”, often used to describe skilled individuals who are forced to be handicapped to reduce the influence of their skill. In one such instance, George reflects: “He tried to think a little about the ballerinas. They weren't really very good -- no better than anyone else would have been, anyways.” (Vonnegut 370) Art, of all things that are human, is supposed to be a representation of experiences, a beautiful and emotional representation of one's truth. However, in “Harrison Bergeron”, art is diminished to become monotonous and unskilled. However, it becomes apparent that this facet does not remain when the handicaps are removed. During Harrison Begeron’s dance, the narrator describes: “And then, in and explosion of joy and grace, into the air they sprang!” (Vonnegut 373) this stark contrast serves to create a positive light on individuality, and to prove that individualism is beautiful.
Vonnegut implicates that we are already on a path towards the dystopian future he describes. Historically, constitutional amendments have been used to protect the rights of individuals. Therefore, to connect his dystopian society to current american culture, Vonnegut describes equality as being the result of the “211th, 212th, and 213th amendments to the constitution.” (Vonnegut 371) Additionally, he utilizes common american activities, including watching television and sitting on the couch. These small facets force the reader to imagine this dystopia in their own world. With this integration, Vonnegut attempts to manifest the feeling that the world of“Harrison Bergeron” is not only feasible, but imminently approaching. Like nothing else, the relationship between the reader's world and this dystopian society will evoke fear in the reader. Therefore, Vonnegut leverages his audience's own perception as a call to action; an impetus to desperately act against systems that may lead down this path.
Vonnegut's portrayal of individualism starkly contrasts the bland world of equality. By simultaneously evaluating an ‘equal’ society’s faults, providing a society without value for individual rights, and providing a sense of realism, Vonnegut’s “Harrison Begeron” serves as a call to action against collectivism. His story serves to highlight the value of individualism, and to reject the notion that equality is always positive.
